docs - troubleshooting sql, error messages, and sql error messages (#22115)
metabase/metabase: docs/troubleshooting-guide/sql-error-message.md

## What's wrong with your SQL query?

> - [I get an error message when I run my SQL query][sql-debugging].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [I get an error message][sql-debugging].
```

- [I don't have an error message, but my query results are incorrect][troubleshoot-sql-logic].

## Debugging SQL queries

If your SQL query contains [SQL variables][sql-variable-def] that look like `{% raw %}{{ variable }}{% endraw %}`, go to [Troubleshooting SQL variables][troubleshoot-sql-variables] first.

1. Go to the line that is failing in your SQL query.
   - [I don’t know where my SQL query is failing][how-to-find-failing-sql-line].
2. Check the [SQL syntax][troubleshoot-sql-syntax] on the line that is failing in your SQL query.
3. Check your [query logic][troubleshoot-sql-logic] if the query uses joins, subqueries, or CTEs.

> ### How does SQL debugging work?

Reviewer: Should we encourage people to limit their results when debugging to speed up query round trips?

> - SQL error messages are displayed for each line in your query that is failing to run. You will need to follow the steps above for each line that is failing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SQL error messages are displayed for each line in your query that fails to run. You'll need to follow the steps above for each line that failed.
```

- If you make any changes to a line, run your query to check if the problem is fixed before moving on to the next step.
- Note that [SQL queries are not run from top to bottom][sql-order-execution], so you won’t be debugging your query lines in the order that they are written. Follow the error messages to help you find the lines that need attention.

## Troubleshooting SQL syntax errors

1. Review the spelling on the line that is failing in your SQL query.
2. Review for missing brackets or commas on the line that is failing in your SQL query.
3. Review for common syntax errors that are [specific to your SQL dialect][sql-reference-guide].

### Common SQL reference guides

Before you start, open up the SQL reference guide for the SQL dialect that you’re using. We’ve linked to some of the most common ones here:

- [MySQL](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/language-structure.html)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-syntax-lexical.html)
- [Microsoft SQL Server](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/t-sql/language-reference)
- [Amazon Redshift](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/dg/cm_chap_SQLCommandRef.html)

> - [Google Bigquery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/lexical)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Google BigQuery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reference/standard-sql/lexical)
```

- [Snowflake](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql-reference/constructs.html)
- [I don’t know what SQL dialect to use][how-to-find-sql-dialect].

### Common SQL syntax errors

What does your error message say?

- [My column or table name is "not found" or "not recognized"][sql-error-not-found].
- [My SQL "function does not exist”][sql-error-function-does-not-exist].

> If your error message is not listed above, search or ask the community on [Discourse][discourse].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a different error message, search or ask the [Metabase community][discourse].
```

#### My column or table name is "not found" or "not recognized".

If your SQL query contains [SQL variables][sql-variable-def] that look like `{% raw %}{{ variable }}{% endraw %}`, go to [Troubleshooting SQL variables][troubleshoot-sql-variables] first.

**Steps:**

1.  Review the **structure** section of the [reference guide][sql-reference-guide] for your SQL dialect.

    - Are you using the correct quotation marks? For example:

      - `SELECT 'column_name'`
      - `SELECT "column_name"`

>       - ` SELECT {% raw %}``column_name``{% endraw %} `

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `SELECT {% raw %}``column_name``{% endraw %}`
```

    - Are you using the correct path to columns and tables? For example:

      - `FROM table_name`
      - `FROM schema_name.table_name`
      - `FROM database_name.schema_name.table_name`

    - Is your column name a reserved word? For example:

      [In PostgresSQL, 'users' is a reserved key word](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-keywords-appendix.html).

      - `SELECT users` will throw an error.
      - `SELECT "users"` will run correctly.

2.  Review the [data reference][data-reference] for the tables and columns in your query.

    - Does the column name exist in the table?

    - If the column name exists, but you can’t query the column from the SQL editor:
      - Ask your Metabase admin if the column was re-named or removed on the database side.
      - If you’re a Metabase admin, you may need to [run a sync][database-syncing] to refresh your data.

3.  If you no longer have an error message, but your query results are incorrect, go to [Troubleshooting SQL logic][troubleshoot-sql-logic].
4.  If you're still stuck, search or ask the community on [Discourse][discourse].

> **Causes:**

Reviewer: Wonder if we should change to "Explanation". Also, is a list the best format for this information?

**Steps:**

1. Review the data type of the column that you want your function to apply to.

   - You can use the Metabase [data reference][data-reference] to review the column's [field type][field-type-def] (as a proxy for [data type][data-type-def]).
   - You can also directly query the information schema in your database if you have permission to access it.

2. Review the **function** section of the [reference guide][sql-reference-guide] for your SQL dialect.

   - Confirm that the function exists for your SQL dialect.
   - Review the data type(s) that are accepted by your function.

3. If the field type of your column does not match the expected data type of your function:

   - Cast your column to the correct data type in your SQL query.
   - If you’re a Metabase admin, you can also [cast data types from the Data model page][how-to-cast-data-type].

4. If you no longer have an error message, but your query results are incorrect, go to [Troubleshooting SQL logic][troubleshoot-sql-logic].
5. If you're still stuck, search or ask the community on [Discourse][discourse].

> **Causes:**

Reviewer: Again, is the list the best format for this? Right now the list items are of different types: 1) explanation, 2) example 2) note. Maybe use a paragraph(s)?

- SQL functions are designed to work on specific data types in your database.
- For example, the [`DATE_TRUNC` function in PostgresSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-datetime.html#FUNCTIONS-DATETIME-TRUNC) works on columns with `date`, `timestamp`, and `time` typed data in a Postgres database. If you try to use the `DATE_TRUNC` function on a column with a `string` data type in your database, it won’t work.
- Note that Metabase [field types][field-type-def] are not one-to-one with the data types in your database. In this case, the field type gives you enough information about the column data type to troubleshoot the error.

**Further reading:**

- [How Metabase executes SQL queries][how-metabase-executes-queries].
- [Field types documentation][field-type-doc].

## I don’t know which line of my SQL query is failing.

If your SQL query contains [SQL variables][sql-variable-def] that look like `{% raw %}{{ variable }}{% endraw %}`, go to [Troubleshooting SQL variables][troubleshoot-sql-variables] first.

Once you find the line that is failing in your SQL query, go to the [Debugging SQL][sql-debugging] steps.

### Reading your SQL error message

> - Does your error message tell you the line or character position?
> - Does your error message include a table or column name? If the table or column name appears more than once in your query, [reduce the size of your query][how-to-reduce-sql-query-size].
> - Does your error message mention a SQL clause?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Does your error message:

- Tell you the line or character position?
- Include a table or column name? If the table or column name appears more than once in your query, [reduce the size of your query][how-to-reduce-sql-query-size].
- Mention a SQL clause?
```

### Reducing the size of a SQL query

- If your query uses subqueries (nested queries), run each subquery separately. Start with the inner subqueries and work your way out.

- If your query uses CTEs, run each CTE separately. Start with your base CTE and work your way down the query.

> - If your query uses any SQL variables that point to Metabase models, run each model separately. Go to the model by opening the variables panel, or enter the model ID number from the variable in the Metabase search bar.

Reviewer 2: I tested this in postgres and redshift (may be all SQL dialects?), if you're using another question and possibly models as a base table, just be extra careful about having lingering comments at the end of the script. 

Question 123
> select plan, created_at
> from dbt_models.self_service_accounts
> limit 10
> -- this comment causes a problem when using the question as a base table.

> select * from {{#123}} t

It will throw "ERROR: syntax error at end of input Position: X"

> - If your query uses subqueries (nested queries), run each subquery separately. Start with the inner subqueries and work your way out.
> 
> - If your query uses CTEs, run each CTE separately. Start with your base CTE and work your way down the query.
> 
> - If your query uses any SQL variables that point to Metabase models, run each model separately. Go to the model by opening the variables panel, or enter the model ID number from the variable in the Metabase search bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If your query uses:

- **Subqueries** (nested queries), run each subquery separately. Start with the inner subqueries and work your way out.
- **CTEs**, run each CTE separately. Start with your base CTE and work your way down the query.
- **SQL variables that point to Metabase models**, run each model separately. Go to the model by opening the variables panel, or enter the model ID number from the variable in the Metabase search bar.
```

Stripped out some preamble and bolded key terms to make it easier to scan.

**Tips for working in the Metabase SQL editor:**

> - Highlight the lines that you want to run, and hit `Cmd + Return` or `Ctrl + Enter`.
> - Highlight the lines that you want to comment out, and hit `Cmd + /` or `Ctrl + /`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you highlight lines of SQL:

- Run the lines with `Cmd + Return` or `Ctrl + Enter`.
- Comment/uncomment the lines with  `Cmd + /` or `Ctrl + /`.
```
